---
layout: post
title:  "All You Need is Love!"
description: "How Molecular and Evolutionary Biology can Explain Emotions"
categories: Science
author: Jocelyn Shen
email: jshen1@andover.edu
tags: Molecular Evolutionary Biology Science
---

“Human behavior flows from three main sources: desire, emotion, and knowledge.” - Plato.
Whether or not you may agree with Plato’s famous saying, it is inevitable that at some point in life, you are going to deal with the combat between rationality and emotion. Emotion undeniable dictates our decisions, good ones and bad ones alike. However, at what point can we scientifically tackle the purpose of this complicated psychological response?<br><br>
In this article, we will focus on the molecular and evolutionary biology of emotion. Emotions, which are scientifically understood to be processed in the amygdala are extremely difficult to understand on a physiological basis. The amygdala is small: the size and shape of an almond, yet it is responsible for some of the most life-changing choices a person may make. Affection can be molecularly understood by studying the endocrine system and the hormones that propagate strong feelings such as love. One of the most important hormones that plays a role in affection is oxytocin, released by the hypothalamus gland during childbirth and during intercourse. The presence of oxytocin shows that attachment developed between a mother and child shows similarities to the attachment between lovers. An example of how important hormones are in romantic attachment is seen in the experiment on the frisky prairie vole, performed by Miranda Lim at Emory University. Emory’s team treated meadow voles with genes encoding for the vasopressin receptor protein. Vasopressin, also known as antidiuretic hormone, was discovered to play an important role in developing long-lasting relationships. The meadow voles that received the gene therapy began to show signs of disinterest in their partners as well as failing to protect their partners from other suitors. This experiment shows the correlation between hormones or hormone reception, and the development of emotions.<br><br>
Abandoning the focus on the molecular biology of emotion, we recognize that from an evolutionary standpoint, love must have a purpose because it is a characteristic that has not yet been eliminated. While this may be stretching the definition of evolution, it is widely accepted that emotion serves an important purpose. Imprinting is a perfect example of the role emotions play in survival. Baby geese become emotionally attached to their "parent" or rather the first large, moving object they see and will follow their parent unconditionally. This is evolutionarily advantageous because the geese rely on their “parent” to protect and feed them. Finally, altruism is a perfect example of an evolutionary phenomenon in which attachment can increase Darwinian fitness (an organism’s ability to contribute its genes to the next generation). Altruism is a behavior where an organism will risk its life to save another relative’s life, whom he or she is strongly attached to. By doing so, the hero can ensure that his or her genes are passed down to the next generation.<br><br>
Simple molecular and evolutionary biology can explain the necessity for emotion. Though these examples can not directly explain how emotions develop and occur, we can simplify our understandings of complex emotional responses. By understanding the effects of hormones on our body, as seen in the prairie vole experiment, and the purpose of imprinting and altruism, we can scientifically argue that powerful emotions such as love are extremely necessary. Some, such as the Beatles, even argue that all you need is love!  