---
layout: post
title:  "Bionic Leaf Beats Nature"
description: "How Molecular and Evolutionary Biology can Explain Emotions"
categories: Science
author: Eric You
email: eyou@andover.edu
img: 28859884.jpeg
sources: |
  1. Biello, D. (2016, June 2). Bionic Leaf Makes Fuel from Sunlight, Water and Air. Retrieved October 2, 2016, from http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/bionic-leaf-makes-fuel-from-sunlight-water-and-air1/
  2. Reull, P. (2016, June 2). Bionic leaf turns sunlight into liquid fuel. Retrieved October 2, 2016, from http://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2016/06/bionic-leaf-turns-sunlight-into-liquid-fuel/
---

You may have learned in Biology class that photosynthesis converts carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight to glucose and oxygen: extremely useful products. Perhaps, you even recall that photosynthesis marks just the beginning of energy production for plants and algae, and that the citric acid cycle follows along with the Krebs cycle, and that mitochondria is the powerhouse of the cell.
Most importantly, you may have been taught, or even secretly realized on your own, that photosynthesis is truly remarkable, because it creates almost all of the world's energy, converting the abundant sunlight into usable energy for life on earth. Yet, for so long, the ability to replicate the simple wonder of Mother Nature's work remained untapped, until now.
In a recent collaboration between Daniel Nocera, a professor at Harvard University's Department of Chemistry, and Pamela Silver, a professor of synthetic biology at Harvard Medical School, they managed to build a "bionic" leaf, which uses both biology and technology (hence bionic) to recreate photosynthesis.<br><br>
This research team, led by Chong Liu, a postdoctoral student, and Brendan Colon, a graduate student  published their findings on June 3, 2016 in Science, one of the world's top peer-reviewed, academic journals.  Inside, they provide a detailed description of their progress improving their design from their first artificial photosynthesis device in 2015 .
Their first design used energy, gathered through a photovoltaic cell (a solar panel), to split water molecules into hydrogen, and oxygen. Then, the hydrogen was fed to specially "pre-starved" hydrogen-eating bacteria to produce liquid fuels, such as isopropanol (aka rubbing alcohol). Sounds simple enough, right? However,  the researchers quickly realized that the catalyst at the cathode (a nickel-molybdenum-zinc (NiMoZn) alloy), responsible for helping produce hydrogen, was also creating reactive oxygen species (ROS) that attacked the bacteria's DNA. The only solution to counteract this unwanted side effect was to run the entire system at higher voltages, so that the ROS were less thermodynamically favored to form, compared to the formation of hydrogen gas. However, this also had the consequence of severely reducing the energy efficiency of the leaf. Not only that, but the nickel within the catalyst had a habit of leaching into the solution of bacteria, killing them through its anti-microbial effects.
<br><br>
The new and improved version still uses the same basic concept, but with a different cobalt-phosphorous (Co-P) alloy as the catalyst at the cathode for hydrogen production. This catalyst, in particular is resistant to generating the ROS, which allows for the leaf to operate under much lower voltages than before. In addition, along with its cobalt phosphate anode, the two electrodes prevent the leaching of cobalt ions into the solution, eliminating the danger of toxicity towards the microbes. Not only that, but their new bionic leaf is capable of additionally producing the alcohol fuels isobutanol, isopentanol, (which are all used in biofuels) and even PHB, an important precursor to bioplastic. Most of all, their leaf reaches a solar energy to biomass conversion rate of about 10%. Although that may not sound like much, it is 10x higher than the 1% efficiency seen only in the fastest-growing of plants. It seems that we can outperform nature now!
<br><br>
This will ultimately have lasting consequences in our quest to save our Earth, just not yet. Although the bionic leaf is truly bursting with potential as a new source of renewable fuel, as well as the ability to reduce carbon dioxide emissions, it just can't compete with conventional fuels yet. The microbes have simply do not make enough fuel quickly enough to be considered a practical source. Not only that, but the largest bionic leaf made so far is not even a liter in size (although there is no theoretical limit).
<br><br>
However, the researchers aren't worried. Instead, they focus on the simplicity of these bionic leaves as their selling point. As Nocera remarks, "This science you can do in your backyard. You don't need a multi-billion dollar massive infrastructure…  I took air plus sunlight plus water and I made stuff out of it, and I did it 10 times better than nature. That makes me feel good."
