---
layout: post
title: "CRISPR"
description: "A new approach to cancer treatment"
category: Science
author: James Jusuf
email: jjusuf@andover.edu
tags: Biology Science Cancer CRISPR
---

It’s well known that cancer is a disease of the genome. A tumor arises when a cell’s DNA is mutated. Mutations may be caused by external factors such as smoking, UV radiation, or other carcinogens, but their effects are the same: a change in the DNA that gives the cell an abnormal growth advantage. The cell then divides uncontrollably, creating more and more copies of itself, which may then invade normal tissues or migrate to other parts of the body.
<br> 
<br> 
For decades, it was believed that the mutations that cause cancer are permanent. Hence, the majority of cancer treatments today simply involve killing or removing all the cancer cells once and for all. Surgical tumor removal is common for localized tumors, while other treatments such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy aim to kill cancer cells using drugs and high-energy X-rays or gamma rays respectively.
<br> 
<br> 
However, these treatments come with many side effects. Unable to differentiate between normal cells and cancer cells, many chemotherapy drugs aim to kill any cells that are dividing. While this definitely targets cancer cells, it also interferes with a patient’s bone marrow, hair follicles, and reproductive system. That’s why many chemotherapy patients lose hair and experience fatigue due to the lack of red blood cells. Meanwhile, radiation damages healthy tissues in the targeted area; for example, many patients undergoing external radiation therapy experience a sunburn-like sensation on the skin. There is also the risk of relapse. Even if a treatment kills 99% of cancer cells, a trace amount of surviving cells may proliferate once again.
<br> 
<br> 
Fortunately, recent developments have allowed us to approach cancer treatment from a completely different angle. One of the most exciting discoveries in recent years is CRISPR Cas9 (an abbreviation for clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats, pronounced “crisper”), a protein derived from bacteria that can be programmed to cleave, alter, or silence DNA at a specific place in the genome. The magic occurs in a 20-nucleotide RNA molecule attached to Cas9 that guides it to the location in the genome containing the complementary DNA sequence. When it arrives at its destination, Cas9 performs its designated function. The original version of Cas9 cleaves DNA, thus rendering it unreadable, which works great for silencing genes. Researchers have also developed various spinoffs, including dCas9 (“dead” Cas9) which performs no function by itself but can be fused to other proteins such as VP64 or histone acetyltransferase, which activate genes.
<br> 
<br> 
Although CRISPR is still in its early stages of development and has not been tested in humans, it holds many promises for the future of cancer treatment. It’s the first time scientists have ever been able to edit the genome’s down to the precision of single nucleotides. Perhaps the mutations in cancer will no longer be as permanent as we had once thought. Instead of attempting to kill cancer cells while harming billions of healthy cells in a haphazard manner, CRISPR will allow us to target malignant cells with unprecedented ease and specificity. Lastly, CRISPR’s customizability also opens up the possibility of personalized cancer care. In the words of Nobel Prize-winning geneticist Phillip Sharp, “It’s changing how we do science.”