---
layout: post
title: "Self Driving Cars"
description: "The Future of Transportation"
categories: Technology
author: Andie Pinga
email: apinga@andover.edu
sources: |
  Adams, T. (2015, September 13). Self-driving cars: from 2020 you will become a permanent backseat driver. Retrieved March 26, 2017, from The Guardian website: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/13/self-driving-cars-bmw-google- 2020-driving<br>
  Clark, B. (2015, February 21). How Self-Driving Cars Work: The Nuts and Bolts Behind Google’s Autonomous Car Program. Retrieved March 26, 2017, from Make Use Of website: http://www.makeuseof.com/tag/how-self-driving-cars-work-the-nuts-and-bolts-behind-googles-autonomous-car-program/<br>
  Engineering.com. (2016, July 15). The Road to Driverless Cars. Retrieved March 26, 2017, from Engineering.com website: http://www.engineering.com/DesignerEdge/DesignerEdgeArticles/ArticleID/12665/The-Road-to-Driverless-Cars-1925--2025.aspx<br>
  King, L. (2016, August 31). Top 15 Causes Of Car Accidents And How You Can Prevent Them. Retrieved March 26, 2017, from The Huffington Post website: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/laiza-king-/top-15-causes-of-car-accidents_b_11722196.html<br>
  Lafrance, A. (2015, September 29). Self-Driving Cars Could Save 300,000 Lives per Decade in America. Retrieved March 26, 2017, from The Atlantic website: https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/09/self-driving-cars-could-save-300000-lives-per-decade-in-america/407956/<br>
  Levin, S. (2017, March 17). The Road Ahead: Self-Dricing Cars On the Brink of a Revolution in California. Retrieved March 26, 2017, from The Guardian website: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/mar/17/self-driving-cars-california-regulation-google-uber-tesla<br>
---
Dreaming of the future usually entails an image of sprawling futuristic metropolitan cities with flying cars zooming in and out of the towering glass skyscrapers. This city only seen in movies may seem far into the future, but innovations in technology are reaching new heights everyday. At this rate of technological progress, this future is attainable within the next century. Although they won’t fly (yet), autonomous cars have already become a reality. The Google initiative for self-driving cars, “Waymo,” plans to debut their fleet on public roads by 2020. (Levin, 2017) The Google company is arguably the most well-known and the most advanced institution creating self-driving cars, but other major companies such as Toyota, GM, Ford, BMW, Uber, and Lyft also plan to launch their autonomous vehicles in the next five to ten years. There is no question that self-driving cars are the vehicles of the future (Adams, 2015).<br><br>
Contrary to popular belief, driverless cars aren’t a recent innovation. In 1925, Houdina Radio Control navigated a radio-controlled “driverless car” up Broadway. This vehicle was controlled by a second car from behind, but still marks the first movement towards creating an autonomous vehicle. Since then, there has only been rapid progress on creating a self-driving car throughout the 19th century. Automated systems, such as cruise control, the Anti-Lock Braking System (ABS), and the Sure Brake System, were implemented in the 1950s, and the 1970s to 1980s marked a revolution of vehicles that were able to drive without any external interference. The first self-contained vehicle was built in 1979 by Stanford University; the “Stanford Cart” used video processing technology to analyze images for ten to fifteen meters for one meter of movement, crossing a room filled with chairs in five hours. About twenty years later, the DARPA (Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency) Grand Challenge was founded in 2004 by the US Government to incentivize autonomous car development. Google ended up recruiting the leading members of winning DARPA challenge teams to start their famous self-driving car project in 2009 (Engineering.com, 2016).<br><br>
Google has created functioning autonomous cars suitable for everyday life by using a combination of Google Maps and Laser Illuminating Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) and Radar technology. LIDAR builds a 3D Map of the car’s surroundings, allowing the car to “see” potential immediate hazards by using a laser beam to determine the distance of profiles of objects. Because LIDAR can’t monitor real-time speeds of passing cars, a radar is used to monitor this information and prevent collisions. The car is also equipped with high-powered cameras that function like LIDAR, which is a fallback in case of malfunctions. These technologies work with Google Maps to position and drive the car. The GPS data from Google Maps includes real-time information and can determine the position of each vehicle to the last centimeter. Additionally, Google’s technology allows the car to learn from each mile logged on the dashboard, as human behavior is logged and analyzed to address potential situations the car may encounter. For example, the car can deduct that other vehicles usually swerve to avoid potholes from previous experiences. Google’s self-driving car is programmed to be the “ideal human driver,” transforming driving and safety on the roads (Clark, 2015).
<br><br>
People are not great at driving – 30,000 people die in car accidents every year (Clark, 2015), and the leading cause of car accidents is distracted driving (King, 2016). Replacing the human element of driving is predicted to reduce traffic fatalities by up to 90% in 2050. This prevents 300,000 motor-related fatalities in a decade and 1.5 million fatalities in 50 years (Lafrance, 2015). Self-driving cars will provide simple transportation for the disabled and elderly who can’t manually drive a regular car. They will also be more energy efficient, as they will be most likely powered by electricity (Clark, 2015).<br><br>
There are still a few problems left in the technology, such as driving in rough weather, but the hurdles that self-driving cars face is more cultural than technological. Only 39% of surveyed people in The Guardian would ever consider buying a driverless car, and the most cited reason for distrust in automated vehicles are their potential for malfunction (Adams, 2015). Placing the wheel in the hands of a machine will most likely destroy driving services and create legal issues in terms of the responsibility when a car accident occurs. However, these cultural shifts are important to create a safer population and is an important realization of the growing presence of machines in our everyday lives. Although the widespread usage of automated cars will most likely take decades to become cultural norm, their implementation will ultimately transform safety in transportation worldwide and will also provide a major step towards the inevitable era of human dependence upon machines.
