---
layout: post
title: "No More Sex?"
description: "The Advancement and Ethics of In Vitro Gametogenesis"
categories: Science
author: Jasmine Harris
email: jharris20@andover.edu
img: no-more-sex.jpg
sources: |
  1. Cohen, I. G., Daley, G. Q., & Adashi, E. Y. (2017). Disruptive reproductive technologies. Science Translational Medicine, 9(372). doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aag2959<br>
  2. Suter, S. M. (2016). In vitro gametogenesis: just another way to have a baby? Journal of Law and the Biosciences, 3(1), 87–119. http://doi.org/10.1093/jlb/lsv057<br>
  3. Rettner, Rachel. (2017). Baby Farms of the Future? Docs Warn of Ethical Issues from New
     Tech.  Live Science, www.livescience.com/57474-ivg-science-ethics-embryo-farms.html. <br>
  4. WGBH American Experience.Test Tube Babies http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/americanexperience/features/general-article/babies-today/<br>
  5. Cohen, I. G., & Adashi, E. Y. (2011). Human Embryonic Stem-Cell Research under Siege — Battle Won but Not the War. New England Journal of Medicine, 364(22). doi:10.1056/nejmp1105088<br>
---

What do biological same-sex parents’ babies, children of postmenopausal women, and single-sex parents with genetically related children have in common? With advances in science, all of these former figments of imagination are becoming possible.<br><br>

In vitro gametogenesis (IVG) is the engineering of gametes, eggs and sperm,  in laboratories instead of in the body. IVG can potentially become a form of assisted fertilization, or aid people and couples who are unable to biologically have children. The key to human IVG is embryonic stem cells (ESCs), also known as induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)(Cohen et al., 2017). ESCs are a type of pluripotent, or unspecified cells that can eventually become specified or made into specialized cells such as that of bone marrow and originate from the inner parts of blastocysts,  or a fertilized eggs that become embryos. ESCs are intended to be randomly made into specific cells, however scientists are finding ways to induce the creation of gametes with ESCs (Suter, 2016).<br><br>

Another key component in IVG is gametogenesis. The traditional formation of an embryo involves the fusion of gametes during fertilization. Gametes are the cellular basis of reproduction and each hold genetic information that is passed down to a zygote, or a fertilized egg. Gamete production or gametogenesis naturally occurs in the gonads, the testes and ovaries of males and females, respectively. As females naturally produce eggs and males produce sperm, there are many difficulties in the conversion of one into the other. The lack of a Y chromosome makes the change from female gametes to male gametes more complex. The only way that oocytes, or eggs, can become sperm cells is if the testes send hormonal signals (Suter, 2016).<br><br>

Despite being unable to form eggs from sperm, in 2016 Chinese researchers were able to create primitive germ cells from ESCs and then use testosterone to form sperm (Cohen et al., 2017). Unfortunately, researchers have been unable to create eggs from sperm and are unsure whether this will be a possibility, as induced pluripotent stem cells have yet to transform into haploid gametogenic cells (Rettner, 2017). Another difficulty in gamete-formation from stem cells is that they must be able to undergo meiosis, a form of cell division, to produce more sex cells.<br><br>

Imprinting patterns are also a potential obstacle in the progress of IVG. Imprinting patterns are the action of genes being tagged which ultimately determines how genes are expressed in offspring. Gametes have imprinting patterns that indicate maternal or parental origin. In zygotes, these patterns determine whether an allele is recessive or dominant. However, only a set amount of genes are expressed via imprinting patterns and the rest of the genes are expressed with both sets of  maternal and paternal genes. To have IVG occur properly, imprinting patterns in ESCs must be temporarily erased, changed to that of a matured gamete with maternal or paternal patterns, and then must be translated to in vitro (Suter, 2016).<br><br>  

Recent breakthroughs in science include the creation of viable offspring from the ESCs of mice. Along with the leaps and bounds scientists are making in proving if IVG is possibility for human reproduction, a questioning of the ethics of IVG rises. Embryo farming presents itself as a potential issue, as people will be able to pick the most genetically fit characteristics for their child, down to the last detail (Rettner, 2017). A variety of embryos can be created via in vitro fertilization (IVF), or the fertilization of eggs with sperm outside the body, increasing the chances of conception. IVF has been in use for over twenty five years. The female who wished to conceive is given a follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) that increases the amount of eggs produced by the ovaries thus resulting in a higher chance of fertilization. Then, the eggs are surgically removed and mixed in a dish with male sperm. After a few days, fertilized eggs are able to be reinserted into the uterus. Unlike IVG, IVF uses gametes that originate from their respective sex instead of engineering them in a lab (“In Vitro Fertilization Today”, 2016). IVG and IVF combined could allow multiple offspring to be created with the genes that the parents wish to be expressed. IVG can likely devalue human life with its methods. The advancement of IVG will also be hindered by multiple safety trials, as eggs created by IVG will be considered as “cellular and gene therapy products” by the Public Health Service Act and Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. IVG involves the construction and destruction of embryos. Some laws have revoked funding for research that involves the use of embryos, as it is seen as unethical which further obstructs the progress of IVG research, including the U.S. with the Dickey-Wicker Amendment (Cohen et al., 2017). The Dickey-Wicker Amendment states that the the use of embryos that could be potentially damaged or killed should be prevented (Adashi et al., 2011). Single-parent offspring suggests risks as scientists are unaware if the chance of health risks are similar to if there are closely related parents (Rettner, 2017). The more looming and pressing ethical issue with in vitro gametogenesis is the decomposition of traditional notions of parentage (Rettner, 2017). IVG questions the necessity for physical intercourse when progeny may no longer need to be created by the fusion of male-originated sperm and female-originated eggs. Although IVG will allow for people who are biologically unable to conceive to have children, ethical concerns with the practice may thwart future research and prevent IVG from becoming a common form of conception.
